+++
title = "My CMake universe"
description = "Literally all I know about CMake"
date = 2023-11-22
draft = false
slug = "cmake-personal-universe"

[taxonomies]
categories = ["tutorial"]
tags = ["cpp", "software-tools"]

[extra]
comments = true
+++

This is part of a series where I write down things I know or I've learned while trying to keep myself sharp in various subjects that I don't use so often anymore.

First, you might be confused about Make and CMAKE, like I was when I learned about both. Make is a much simpler system that’s not cross platform compatible. CMAKE is also just a better system at handling complex build systems, it also contains robust mechanisms to locate libraries and executables. CMake is primarily a build system generator, not a build tool itself. It sets up the environment for building but delegates the actual compilation and installation to native build tools (like Make).

- List all of the commands and a short description about them organized by phase they should be added in your CMake file:
    
    ### Project declaration:
    
    - **`project`**: Sets the name and version of the project. This command also sets useful variables like `PROJECT_NAME`, `PROJECT_VERSION`, and more.
    - **`cmake_minimum_required`**: Sets the minimum required version of CMake for a project, ensuring compatibility and proper interpretation of the CMake scripts.
    - `**target_compile_features**`: You will also need to set the language version you’re using.
        
        ```python
        target_compile_features(particles PUBLIC cxx_std_11)
        ```
        
    
    ### Global variable declaration and flags:
    
    - **`set`**: Used to define and set CMake variables that control various aspects of the build process.
    - **`option`**: Introduces a boolean option that the user can control from the command line. It's useful for conditional compilation or including optional features.
    
    ### Include directories:
    
    - **`include_directories`:** Is used to add directory paths to the list of directories that the compiler will search for include files during the compilation process.
        - It’s the same as running `cmake -I path/to/dir`. It simply adds a  directory for the CMAKE to bundle header files in there with source files.
    
    ### Find dependencies:
    
    - **`find_package`**: Searches for and locates external libraries or packages, ensuring that the necessary dependencies are included in the build process. It's key for managing external dependencies.
        - In order to create your own `find_package` function you can just write a normal CMAKE file in which you. First you add the path to library, then you find the library itself, name it, then you include and handle any dependencies this library has (and add them to the CMAKE file) and then you can finally create a library with the the `add_library` function.
        
        ```python
        find_path(MY_LIB_INCLUDE_DIR MyLib.h)
        find_library(MY_LIB_LIBRARY NAMES mylib)
        
        include(FindPackageHandleStandardArgs)
        find_package_handle_standard_args(MyLib DEFAULT_MSG MY_LIB_INCLUDE_DIR MY_LIB_LIBRARY)
        
        if(MY_LIB_FOUND)
          add_library(MyLib::MyLib UNKNOWN IMPORTED)
          set_target_properties(MyLib::MyLib PROPERTIES
            IMPORTED_LOCATION "${MY_LIB_LIBRARY}"
            INTERFACE_INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES "${MY_LIB_INCLUDE_DIR}")
        endif()
        ```
        
        - `include`: the primary functionality of `include` is to include other CMAKE scripts into the code.
        - but you don’t need to create your own `find_package` every time, if the library is simple enough you can just add a few lines of code into your current CMAKE. In the following case we find the library and link it together with our executable `target_link_libraries`.
        
        ```python
        include_directories("/path/to/library/include")
        link_directories("/path/to/library/lib")
        add_executable(my_app main.cpp)
        target_link_libraries(my_app libname)
        ```
        
        - It might seem counterintuitive to configure and then link things, but that’s just how CMAKE good standards go.
        - `REQUIRED` key word: will throw an error if package not found
        - `MODULE` key word: `find_package` searches for pkgs in two ways: through modules and through config. The config way it expects a `FooConfig.cmake` file that will look for a proper cmake configuration file and the module way is the usual way that packages that do not support CMAKE natively use and you have written it yourself something like `Foo.cmake`
        - `CONFIG`: as explained in the previous point will look for a config file, which are simpler. Usually they can be automatically configured, for example.
        - If neither the `CONFIG` nor `MODULE` keywords are available than that means that CMAKE will try to look for pkgs both ways.
    
    ### Add executable or library targets:
    
    - `**add_executable**`: creates an executable from the specified source files. This executable is the final binary program that runs on a computer. It typically defines the main entry point for a program. In a build system you can have multiple targets, the `add_executable` specifically identifies one of the targets (libs, modules, tests…) as the executable, making it clear which component is the final runnable output. If you have different executables for different operational systems then you have it indicated through flags:
        
        ```python
        cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.10)
        project(MyProject)
        
        # Check the operating system
        if(WIN32)
            # Windows-specific build
            add_executable(MyExecutable_win main_windows.cpp)
            # Additional Windows-specific configuration here
        elseif(APPLE)
            # macOS-specific build
            add_executable(MyExecutable_mac main_macos.cpp)
            # Additional macOS-specific configuration here
        elseif(UNIX AND NOT APPLE)
            # Linux/Unix-specific build
            add_executable(MyExecutable_unix main_unix.cpp)
            # Additional Unix-specific configuration here
        else()
            message(FATAL_ERROR "Unsupported operating system")
        endif()
        
        # Common configuration that applies to all executables
        # ...
        ```
        
    - `**add_library**`: this builds a library from the source code. **A library is a collection of pre-compilled code that can be reused in various program.** This function will typically generate either static or shared(dynamic) libraries.
        - Here’s a note on how the memory is divided between different software using dynamic libraries: the code itself is shared but because each process has their own memory when the processes need access to variables and such then the OS creates copies of those (no global state, etc) is shared by different processes
    
    ### Link libraries:
    
    - **`target_link_libraries`**: is used to specify which libraries an executable target or another library should link against during the linking phase of the build process. When building an executable or a library that depends on other libraries, you need to link these libraries to your target. `target_link_libraries` is used for this purpose. It ensures that the linker knows which libraries to link to your target during the build process.
        
        ```python
        target_link_libraries(<target> <PRIVATE|PUBLIC|INTERFACE> <item>...)
        ```
        
        - Why use it? There’s a bunch of goodies that makes your life much easier:
            - It automatically handles the necessary compiler and liker flags for you
            - It deals with dependency management
            - If you use the `PUBLIC` or `INTERFACE` flags it will retroactively deal with the dependencies for you
        - The `PRIVATE`, `PUBLIC`, and `INTERFACE` flags relate to how you want to manage the visibility of the propagation of link dependencies and include paths in the project.
            - `PRIVATE`: The linked libraries are used by the target, but their link dependencies and include paths are not propagated to other targets.
            - `PUBLIC`: They are propagated to the projects that are using this library
            - `INTERFACE` : Is meant for when you’re not compiling the target into a library but you still want the libraries that connect to it to be able to find and inherit its dependencies.
    
    ### Set target properties:
    
    - `**set_target_properties**`: Can configure how the target (typically an executable or a shared library) finds its dependencies at runtime. It uses the `RPATH` variable for that. But it’s also used to a myriad of things: set properties can control various aspects of how the target is built and linked, such as compiler options, definitions, include directories, and more.
        
        ```python
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES CXX_STANDARD 17)
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES COMPILE_DEFINITIONS "DEBUG=1")
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES "/path/to/includes")
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES COMPILE_OPTIONS "-Wall;-Wextra;-O2")
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES OUTPUT_NAME "my_custom_name")
        set_target_properties(my_target PROPERTIES LINK_LIBRARIES "lib1;lib2")
        ```
        
        - Just as a note -Wall and -Wextra are turning on warnings and -02 is an optimization flag that will try to hit a balance between space and speed for the result of the compilation.
        - These are going to override global settings.
    - **`target_compile_definitions`** and **`target_compile_options`**: These commands add preprocessor definitions and compile options to a target, respectively. They offer fine-grained control over the compilation process.  But they’re kind of like `set_target_properties`.
    - **`target_include_directories`**: The main difference between `include_directories` and `target_include_directories` is that the first one has a global scope, while the later sets the scope for a specific target. This should be used in more complex projects in which you have several targets with different include requirements.
    
    ### Add custom commands and configurations:
    
    - **`add_custom_command`** and **`add_custom_target`**: These commands are used to add custom build steps and targets, allowing the execution of custom commands during the build process.
        - Ways of adding custom command. You can run scripts like so:
        
        ```python
        add_custom_target(
            generate_docs
            COMMAND doxygen Doxyfile
            COMMENT "Generating documentation with Doxygen"
        )
        ```
        
        - It’s a kind of bash script within CMAKE, it will add a step to your make, for example with the previous case you can now run `make generate_docs` and this piece of code will run.
    - **`ExternalProject_Add`**: Adds a step to download, update, and build an external project. It's useful for integrating external code bases that are not part of the main project.
        
        ```python
        ExternalProject_Add(name
            [GIT_REPOSITORY <git_repo_url>]
            [GIT_TAG <git_tag>]
            [SOURCE_DIR <source_dir>]
            [BINARY_DIR <binary_dir>]
            [CONFIGURE_COMMAND <command>]
            [BUILD_COMMAND <command>]
            [INSTALL_COMMAND <command>]
            [...other options...]
        )
        ```
        
        - It’s a command that can handle the entire lifecycle of an external project.
    - **`add_subdirectory`**: Adds a subdirectory to the build. This is essential for structuring larger projects with multiple components or libraries.
    - **`configure_file`**: Copies and processes a file, replacing variable references with their current values. Useful for generating configuration headers and similar tasks.
        - Allows you to add variables to your files, like versioning for example.
    - **`file`**: Provides various file manipulation capabilities, such as generating a list of source files, copying files, etc.
    
    ### Install:
    
    - **`install`**: Specifies how and where files should be installed on the system when you run the `make install` command (or the installation step of your chosen build system).
        
        ```python
        # Create an executable target
        add_executable(my_app src/main.cpp)
        
        # Define where to install the executable
        install(TARGETS my_app DESTINATION bin)
        
        # Create a library target
        add_library(my_lib SHARED src/my_lib.cpp)
        
        # Define where to install the library
        install(TARGETS my_lib LIBRARY DESTINATION lib)
        
        # Install header files
        install(DIRECTORY include/ DESTINATION include)
        ```
        
        - **TARGETS**: Used to install targets, like executables or libraries. You specify the actual target names and where they should be installed (`DESTINATION`). The destination is usually relative to the installation prefix, which is typically `/usr/local` on Unix systems but can be set to a different value.
        - **LIBRARY, RUNTIME, ARCHIVE**: Specify where different types of targets should be installed. `LIBRARY` is for shared libraries, `RUNTIME` for executables and DLLs, and `ARCHIVE` for static libraries.
        - **FILES**: Used to install individual files. You specify the files and their destination.
        - **DIRECTORY**: Used to install directories of files. It copies the contents of specified directories to a destination directory.
        - **CONFIGURATIONS**: Optionally, you can specify configurations (like Debug, Release) for which the install rules apply.
        - **PERMISSIONS**: You can set file permissions for Unix systems.
        - **COMPONENT**: Used for component-based installations, allowing users to select which components to install.
    
    ### Test:
    
    - **`enable_testing`** and **`add_test`**: These commands are used to enable and add tests to a project. They integrate with CTest for managing test suites.
    
    ### Package:
    
    - **`CPack`**: CMake's packaging system, which is used to create installers and distributable packages for a project.
        - It’s used to create binaries and source pkgs. After running your project with CMAKE you run CPACK to generate the pkgs.
    
    ### Others:
    
    - `**macro` vs `function`**: macros don’t have a defined scope, while functions do.
    - **`message`**: Generates a message during the CMake run. Useful for debugging or providing build-time information.